docs/CONTEXT_PACK.md, before:

# Context Pack (v1)

`context-pack` is a bounded agent output: one query → one compact JSON with the most relevant code chunks.

The CLI and the MCP server return `ContextPackOutput` under the `data` field of the standard `CommandResponse` envelope (`{status,hints,data,meta}`).

Canonical schema (source of truth):

- [contracts/command/v1/context_pack.schema.json](../contracts/command/v1/context_pack.schema.json)

## Filtering (recommended)

For agent workloads, reduce noise early by filtering paths at the request level:

- `options.include_paths` / `options.exclude_paths` (prefix match on relative paths)
- `options.file_pattern` (substring match, or `glob` when it contains `*` / `?`)

These filters are applied during pack assembly (so they affect `budget` deterministically).

## Schema (data)

```jsonc
{
  "version": 1,
  "query": "string",
  "model_id": "string",
  "profile": "string",
  "items": [
    {
      "id": "path:start_line:end_line",
      "role": "primary|related",
      "file": "path",
      "start_line": 1,
      "end_line": 2,
      "symbol": "optional string",
      "type": "optional string (chunk type)",
      "score": 0.0,
      "imports": ["..."],
      "content": "string",
      "relationship": ["optional edge labels..."], // optional
      "distance": 1                                // optional
    }
  ],
  "budget": {
    "max_chars": 20000,
    "used_chars": 1234,
    "truncated": false,
    "dropped_items": 0
  }
}
```

## Examples

### 1) Identifier query

```json
{
  "budget": {
    "dropped_items": 1,
    "max_chars": 800,
    "truncated": true,
    "used_chars": 250
  },
  "items": [
    {
      "content": "use std::path::{Path, PathBuf}\n\npub(crate) struct EmbeddingCache {\n    base_dir: PathBuf,\n}",
      "end_line": 9,
      "file": "crates/vector-store/src/embedding_cache.rs",
      "id": "crates/vector-store/src/embedding_cache.rs:7:9",
      "imports": [
        "use std::path::{Path, PathBuf}"
      ],
      "role": "primary",
      "score": 1.0,
      "start_line": 7,
      "symbol": "EmbeddingCache",
      "type": "struct"
    }
  ],
  "model_id": "bge-small",
  "profile": "quality",
  "query": "EmbeddingCache",
  "version": 1
}
```

### 2) File-path query

```json
{
  "budget": {
    "dropped_items": 1,
    "max_chars": 800,
    "truncated": true,
    "used_chars": 531
  },
  "items": [
    {
      "content": "pub const CHUNK_CORPUS_SCHEMA_VERSION: u32 = 1;",
      "end_line": 7,
      "file": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs",
      "id": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs:7:7",
      "imports": [],
      "role": "primary",
      "score": 1.0,
      "start_line": 7,
      "symbol": "CHUNK_CORPUS_SCHEMA_VERSION",
      "type": "const"
    },
    {
      "content": "use context_code_chunker::CodeChunk\nuse std::collections::{BTreeMap, HashSet}\n\npub struct ChunkCorpus {\n    files: BTreeMap<String, Vec<CodeChunk>>,\n}",
      "end_line": 12,
      "file": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs",
      "id": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs:10:12",
      "imports": [
        "use context_code_chunker::CodeChunk",
        "use std::collections::{BTreeMap, HashSet}"
      ],
      "role": "primary",
      "score": 0.9990000128746033,
      "start_line": 10,
      "symbol": "ChunkCorpus",
      "type": "struct"
    }
  ],
  "model_id": "bge-small",
  "profile": "quality",
  "query": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs",
  "version": 1
}
```

Commit message:

context_pack: code-first, docs exclusion, focused halo

docs/CONTEXT_PACK.md, after:

# Context Pack (v1)

`context-pack` is a bounded agent output: one query → one compact JSON with the most relevant code chunks.

The CLI and the MCP server return `ContextPackOutput` under the `data` field of the standard `CommandResponse` envelope (`{status,hints,data,meta}`).

Canonical schema (source of truth):

- [contracts/command/v1/context_pack.schema.json](../contracts/command/v1/context_pack.schema.json)

## Filtering (recommended)

For agent workloads, reduce noise early by filtering paths at the request level:

- `options.include_paths` / `options.exclude_paths` (prefix match on relative paths)
- `options.file_pattern` (substring match, or `glob` when it contains `*` / `?`)

These filters are applied during pack assembly (so they affect `budget` deterministically).

## Code vs docs preference (agent ergonomics)

`context_pack` can be tuned to be implementation-first or documentation-first:

- `prefer_code` (bool): when `true`, rank code/test/config before markdown docs; when `false`, rank docs before code.
- `include_docs` (bool): when `false`, exclude `*.md` / `*.mdx` from both primary and related items.
- `related_mode` (`explore` | `focus`):
  - `explore` keeps a broader halo (good for research / onboarding).
  - `focus` gates related items by query-token hits and favors matching chunks (good for “where/how implemented”).

Defaults are chosen heuristically for agent workflows:

- For docs-intent queries (`README`, `docs`, `tutorial`, `*.md`), default is docs-first + `related_mode=explore`.
- For identifier/path queries, default is code-first + `related_mode=focus`.

## Schema (data)

```jsonc
{
  "version": 1,
  "query": "string",
  "model_id": "string",
  "profile": "string",
  "items": [
    {
      "id": "path:start_line:end_line",
      "role": "primary|related",
      "file": "path",
      "start_line": 1,
      "end_line": 2,
      "symbol": "optional string",
      "type": "optional string (chunk type)",
      "score": 0.0,
      "imports": ["..."],
      "content": "string",
      "relationship": ["optional edge labels..."], // optional
      "distance": 1                                // optional
    }
  ],
  "budget": {
    "max_chars": 20000,
    "used_chars": 1234,
    "truncated": false,
    "dropped_items": 0
  }
}
```

## Examples

### 1) Identifier query

```json
{
  "budget": {
    "dropped_items": 1,
    "max_chars": 800,
    "truncated": true,
    "used_chars": 250
  },
  "items": [
    {
      "content": "use std::path::{Path, PathBuf}\n\npub(crate) struct EmbeddingCache {\n    base_dir: PathBuf,\n}",
      "end_line": 9,
      "file": "crates/vector-store/src/embedding_cache.rs",
      "id": "crates/vector-store/src/embedding_cache.rs:7:9",
      "imports": [
        "use std::path::{Path, PathBuf}"
      ],
      "role": "primary",
      "score": 1.0,
      "start_line": 7,
      "symbol": "EmbeddingCache",
      "type": "struct"
    }
  ],
  "model_id": "bge-small",
  "profile": "quality",
  "query": "EmbeddingCache",
  "version": 1
}
```

### 2) File-path query

```json
{
  "budget": {
    "dropped_items": 1,
    "max_chars": 800,
    "truncated": true,
    "used_chars": 531
  },
  "items": [
    {
      "content": "pub const CHUNK_CORPUS_SCHEMA_VERSION: u32 = 1;",
      "end_line": 7,
      "file": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs",
      "id": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs:7:7",
      "imports": [],
      "role": "primary",
      "score": 1.0,
      "start_line": 7,
      "symbol": "CHUNK_CORPUS_SCHEMA_VERSION",
      "type": "const"
    },
    {
      "content": "use context_code_chunker::CodeChunk\nuse std::collections::{BTreeMap, HashSet}\n\npub struct ChunkCorpus {\n    files: BTreeMap<String, Vec<CodeChunk>>,\n}",
      "end_line": 12,
      "file": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs",
      "id": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs:10:12",
      "imports": [
        "use context_code_chunker::CodeChunk",
        "use std::collections::{BTreeMap, HashSet}"
      ],
      "role": "primary",
      "score": 0.9990000128746033,
      "start_line": 10,
      "symbol": "ChunkCorpus",
      "type": "struct"
    }
  ],
  "model_id": "bge-small",
  "profile": "quality",
  "query": "crates/vector-store/src/corpus.rs",
  "version": 1
}
```
